First pass at engine contributor documentation for adding scene files, and the Open Asset Importer Library. (#2350)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/engine-dev/scenepipeline/addingscenefiles.md

---
linkTitle: Adding Scene Files
title: Adding Scene Files
description: Describes the steps to take to add support for additional scene file formats.

weight: 100
---

## Overview

O3DE uses the [Open Asset Importer Library](./openassetimporter) to load scene files from a variety of scene formats, including files in the `fbx` format.

This page covers the steps to take to enable additional scene file formats in the scene pipeline.

> ## Enabling a scene format supported by [Open Asset Importer Library](./openassetimporter)

Reviewer: I think it would be good to mention some scene types that are currently enabled and potentially point to https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/development/Registry/sceneassetimporter.setreg

Author: I link to https://www.o3de.org/docs/user-guide/assets/scene-settings/scene-format-support/ to avoid information duplication and minimize the maintenance cost of this documentation.

I didn't want to have the information spread out and duplicated in the documentation a bunch because it could easily lead to gaps of stale information. If someone enables Collada, I didn't want to introduce some hidden places that needed to be updated to mention that.

### Understand the feature set of the O3DE scene pipeline, and the file format you are enabling

There is a lot of variance in what information scene files of different formats can support. For example, the `stl` format does not contain information like UVs for texture mapping. You will want to read through the available documentation for the scene file format you are enabling before moving to the next step.

Understanding what the format you are enabling supports and what the scene pipeline supports will help you figure out your approach to enabling the format, especially in relation to testing, both manual and automated, that will be done before finishing this work. You can read more about the scene pipeline in the [Scene Pipeline](../../user-guide/assets/scene-pipeline) and [Scene Settings](../../user-guide/assets/scene-settings) documentation for O3DE.

> Finally, you'll want to understand the current support level for the format you are enabling, in the [Open Asset Importer Library](./openassetimporter) itself. Scene files often have many sub versions, for example `fbx` is not a single static file format, but it has been extended and changed throughout the years, and [Open Asset Importer Library](./openassetimporter) best supports 2011, 2012, and 2013 versions of the `fbx` file format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, you'll want to understand the current support level for the format you are enabling, in the [Open Asset Importer Library](./openassetimporter) itself. Scene files often have many sub versions, for example `fbx` is not a single static file format, but it has been extended and changed throughout the years, and [Open Asset Importer Library](./openassetimporter) supports 2011, 2012, and 2013 versions of the `fbx` file format.
```

Reviewer 2: IMHO `bests` by itself is not helpful. You could mention it officially supports versions, or add line to say that AssImp can import other versions but may not correctly import all features etc.

> ### Enable the format for importing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Enable additional file formats for importing
```

As covered in the [Scene Format Support](../../user-guide/assets/scene-settings/scene-format-support) documentation, the list of enabled scene file formats are managed via the settings registry key `O3DE/SceneAPI/AssetImporter/SupportedFileTypeExtensions`. The first step in enabling a new format is to add that file format to the list here.

> Engine customers are encouraged to extend this settings registry key at the project level, and not this global settings level, so they can enable it just for their project. This documentation is for engine contributors, people who want to enable a new scene file format for all O3DE users.

Reviewer 2: I would swap `Engine customers` with `O3DE users`

> Enabling the format in this workflow is a data change so far. No code needs to be recompiled, so the Asset Processor can be re-launched to make sure it has loaded the latest settings registry file. You can verify you've enabled the format by going to the `Builders` tab of the Asset Processor, selecting the `Scene Builder` from the list, and checking that the new extension is added to the pattern list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enabling the format in this workflow is a data change, no code needs to be recompiled. The Asset Processor should be re-launched to make sure it has loaded the latest settings registry file. You can verify you've enabled your chosen format by going to the `Builders` tab of the Asset Processor, selecting the `Scene Builder` from the list, and checking that the new extensions is added to the pattern list.
```

> ### Testing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Testing the new file format
```

> Once the format is enabled, you will want to test this change. This workflow generally starts with some manual tests by adding files to a local project in the new format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the format is enabled, you will want to test this change. Its recommended that you start with manual testing by adding example files, in the new format, to a local test project.
```
